# AWSAP-Notes

These are personal notes that I am taking as I work my way through A Cloud Guru's AWS Architect Pro course. 

Please note that I cannot certify that these notes are 100% correct as things change quite rapidly in the cloud world. They are simply my notes as I learned things. 

---
## The Exam

All of AWS' test questions are based on [Bloom's Taxonomy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bloom%27s_taxonomy). As this is a professional exam (not associate), the expectation is that the student will be in phase two of the taxonomy where you analyze/apply/evaluate the content domain. 

**NOTE:** Some of the questions on the exam are beta questions which will not be scored against you. 

**NOTE:** AWS' documentation states that a technology should be GA for about 6 months before they will consider having it on their exams. This means that most brand new tech will not be featured. 

**NOTE:** Make sure to read all of the supplemental material as it fills gaps in the required information that is not covered in the course. 

I will link all white papers I find below for later reading: 

---

## White Papers

- Link them here. 

--- 

## Data Stores 

#### Key Concepts/Terms

**Three Types of Data Store:**
- **Persistent Data Stores** - Durable and sticks around after reboot. 
  - EX: Glacier/RDS
- **Transient Data Stores** - Temporarily stored so that it can be passed along to another service or storage medium. 
  - EX: SQS/SNS
- **Ephemeral Data Stores** - Does not persist to disk. You reboot, you lose. 
  - EX: EC2 Instance Store or Memcached/Redis

**IOPS vs. Throughput**
    - **IOPS:** Measure of how fast we can read/write to a device. 
    - **Througput:** Measure of how much data can be moved at a time

**Consistency**
 - Consistency is far better than rare moments of greatness - Scott Ginsberg - Consistency in data stores regards the rules with which that particular data store behaves when handling the data. In theory, the data store should always follow its consistency model

 **Consistency Models**
 - **ACID:** (Think MySQL)
    - **A**tomic: Transactions are all or nothing. They happen or they don't. 
    - **C**onsistent: Transactions must be validated (think ANSI) or they will not happen. 
    - **I**solated: One transaction can't mess with another. 
    - **D**urable: Completed Transaction must stick around. 
 - **BASE:** (Think Fastly)
   - **B**asic **A**vailability - Values must be present even if stale
   - **S**oft-state - Might not be instantly consistent across all stores
   - **E**ventual Consistency - Achieved at some point. Eventually.


#### S3

AWS S3 was first offered in 2006 as one of the first services (SQS was the first one). It is an **Object Store** which is extremely important to remember. 

- The maximum file size in S3 is 5TB.
- The maximum PUT is 5GB.
- AWS Recommends multi-part uploads to S3 if the file is over 100MB in size.

- Remember that S3 is an Object store. What does this mean?
  - There are no file paths. There are KEYS. The *path* is actually the key to the file. The "path" part of it is actually the key and is structured that way for simplicity of use. Because of this, S3 is more like a DB than a true filestore. 

**S3 Security**
- Resource Based (Object ACL, Bucket Policy, CORS)
- User-Based (IAM)
- Multi-Factor-Before-Delete and for version state change
- Versioning - This should not be new to you. 
  - Enables roll-back
  - Counts as billable size in S3 storage
  - Can be integrated with S3 lifecycle management.
- S3 Encryption at Rest
  - SSE-S3 AES-256 - Default AWS Key
  - SSE-C - Upload your own AES-256 Keys which S3 will use
  - SSE-KMS - Use a key generated by AWS KMS
  - Client-Side - BYOK

**Storage Classes**
- Standard
  - Normal access
- Standard-IA (infrequent Access)
  - 30 days min storage - Min billable 128kb
  - Multi-AZ
- One Zone-IA
  - 1 AZ only with 30 days min storage and 128kb min billable
- Reduced Redundancy
  - Only used for frequently access but non-critical data
  - Comes with multi-az
- Intelligent Tiering
  - This is for long-lived data with changing or unknown access patterns. 
  - Has multi-AZ
  - Min Storage during is 30 dayts
- Glacier
  - Long-term archiving of data with slower retrieval times (minutes to hours) 
  - Requires 90 days of storage duration
  - has multi-az
- Glacier Deep Archive
  - Even slower retrieval times than regular glacier (12 hour SLA)
  - Requires 180 days min storage duration
  - multi-az

**Lifecycle Management**
- Applies rules/policies to your files that will govern storage classes and automate versions/deletions etc.. 
  - current version/previous version/tags all work for identifying and applying policies

**S3 Analytics**
- Data Lakes - Athena, Redshift, Quicksight
- IoT Streaming Data Repos - Firehose
- Machine Learning and AI - Rekognition, Lex, MXNet
- Storage Class Analysis - S3 Management Analytics

**Other Stuff**
- Transfer Acceleration - Uses CloudFront to speed up your data transfers
- Requester Pays - This option is for when someone else performs an operation on your cloud and you want them to pay for it. 
- Tags - Almost every AWS Service has tags for quick identification of assets
- Events - You can use S3 combined with lambda and other tools such as CloudWatch to trigger events 
- Static Web Hosting - You can use an S3 bucket to setup a static (no dynamic code) website
- BitTorrent - S3 supports this protocol. Basically sets you up as a seed and then distributes your torrent files outward

#### Glacier

#### Elastic Block Storage

#### Elastic File System

#### Storage Gateway

#### WorkDocs
- Box for AWS - Nothing important here. 

#### EC2 Databases
- You manage the software
- Good option for non-RDS supported flavors of DB
- Not much to really cover here. You install the stuff and it goes brrrr

#### RDS
- Anti-Patterns of RDS
  - Lots of large Binary Objects --> S3
  - Automated Scalability --> DDB
  - Name/Value Structure --> DDB
  - Data is not well-Structured --> DDB
  - Other DB that is not supported by RDS --> EC2
  - Complete control over DB is required --> EC2
- Standby host on Multi-AZ --> Stand-by hosts are synchronous in data transactions 
- Read Replicas are NOT synchronous to the master/stand-by
- Failover takes a standby and promotes
- Read Replicas can be promoted as well but its a lot more work.

#### DynamoDB

#### Redshift

#### Neptune

#### Elasticache

---

## Networking

--- 

## Security

--- 

## Migrations

--- 

## Architecture at Scale 

---

## Business Continuity

--- 

## Deployment and Ops Management

--- 

## Cost Management
